Advanced Techniques for EEG Processing - Laboratory Exercises  
 

Exercise 7 (this is the continuation of Exercise 1) 

Exercise 1 applies some preprocessing steps to EEG data acquired on a subject while performing a trial-based 
experiment, consisting in a 3-stimulus auditory oddball task (see the text of Exercise 1 for the explanation of 
the task). The EEG data were recorded continously from 59 electrodes using CPz as reference electrode, at 
sampling rate of 500 Hz. The preprocessing steps in Exercise 1 consist of: i) detrending; ii) low-pass, high-pass 
and notch filtering; iii) extraction of epochs (in a 3-D matrix); iv) concatenation of  extracted epochs (returning 
to a 2-D matrix); v) identification of bad channel(s) using the correlation method; vi) removal of bad channel(s) . 
Here, the preprocessing steps are completed by: computing ICA on good channels and cleaning good channels 
from artifacts; interpolating the bad channels using the cleaned good channel data; re-referencing to average 
reference also recovering the online reference electrode (CPz). Create a new .m file for the following steps.  

1)Lo ad the .mat fsubi-03l5_Perepr socesasStvep1e.matd c aotn tthaei ennidn go ft hExee rcise 1 

following quantities: 

X: 2-D matrix of the epoch-concatenated data containing only good channels; 

ch_names: cell arra￿y= c 5e9olnetcatirnoidnegs t (bheo ltah gboeolds  aonfd a blald t ehel ectrodes); 

srate: value o50f H0z t);h e sampling rate (

stim_types: cell array indicating the type of each applied stimulus (labels: ‘standard’, ‘target’, 

‘distractor’); 

index_bad: the numerical array containing the index/indices of the bad channel/s; 

index_good: the numerical a. rray containing the indices of the good channels

Note that, only one channel (index 11, corresponding to F1) resulted ‘bad’ based on the adopted criterion. 
TherX heaf5so8 s ×ri e9 wz7,h5 e50e8i0  rse t he num9b75 ec00ro rorfe gsopoodn cdhsa ntnoe ls and 

the number of time sam19)p5×    lneusm boefr a olfl  concatenated epochs = total number of epochs (
sampl50,e0 ssi pnecre e epaocchh e (poch contanins 1 second data). 

2  )Save theX  giono ad .dm cataaEhxeartcisn fe7_n1i.mealt)le. s (e d.agt.,a  

3)Fo  r tX,h oeb dtaatian  the demixing matrix and the topographic maps of the ICs using the toolbox 

EEGLAB, throug h the following steps: 

3. Laau)nch EEGLAB fro>>emegl atb he command window 

3. Imbp)ort in EEGLAB the saved .mat file (obtained at point 2) and the file containing the good channel 
locations (‘Standard-10Fi-2l0e-C>aImpp58o_rgoto d.locs’). To this aim, from the EEGLAB GUI select ‘
Data>Using EEGLAB Function’s,  tahnedn Pl furgoimn tsh>eFr om ASCII/float file or Matlab array
‘Browse’ button on theDa ttoap s s aemlpelcitn tgh rea staev’ed .mat file and in correspondence to ‘
indicates the value of the sampling rate (in Hz). In the same window, use the ‘Browse’ button on the 
roChwa onfn ‘ el’  tloo ciamtpioornt  ftihel fei olre i ‘nStfaondard-10-20-Cap58_good.locs’. Leave unfilled 
the other edit boxes. Press OK and assign a name to the dataset. It is possible to display the time 
patternPl ooft t>hChe’a i.n mnpeolr dtaetda s (iScgrnoallls) ‘

3. Ecs)timate the demixing matrix and the independent components of the imported dataset by 
selToeo Declctsoi>mnpg’o a ‘sned D saettat biyn ICAg 

ICA algo  r riu  tnhimc tao use

Comman  ‘delxitneen odpetdi’,o 1n, ‘sbias’, ‘off’, ‘rndreset’, ‘no’ 

Press Ok and wait for the algorithm to terminate. It is possible to display the time pattern of the 
estimated iPlnodte>pCoemnpd’oe.n netn cto amcptoinveanttiso snesl (eSccrtoilnlg) ‘

3. Ddi)splay the topographic maps of the estimated independent components (limit to only the first 30 
compoPnleontt>Cso)m s’p aeonl1nd:e 3ie 0ctnnty tcip omneraCg orp ‘mesps>oInpn o2e-nDndte nce to ‘
nu)m.b Saevres t’he (.figmap)IC cs_Exoercniset7.fiag)i. ning the topographic maps (e.g. 

3. Exep)ort theFi dleem>iExxpionrg,t  ma>anWetdir ggiihxvt se me aal ntearcmitexi t ntogo   ‘text file’
the file, smpatreixW_cExeircifse7.ytxti).n g the extension .txt (e.g. 


 
 


 


 
 
 


 


 


 


1 


3. Safv)e the currenFitl dea>tSaav’se,e a ctsu csrriregeanntiten ddga  iatn a EsEGLAeB ste(sl)ecting ‘

name (two files are automatically saved with extension .set and .fdt). 

3. Clgo)se the EEGLAB wicnleadr)o.  ws and clean the workspace (

4)R e turn in ylooadu tro m i.m spcorritp tth aen dde umsiex fiunngc mtaitorni x from the saved file. Use the 
demixing matrix to compute the estimated independent components and plot them as a function of time.  

5  )Compute the power specpwetlchr).a  l density of the estimated independent components (using 

6  )The independent components that are likely to mainly extract artifact activity are: 1,4,6,11, from 14 to 25, 
28 and 29p.lot U_sIC.im, negx afmuinncet itohen s patial, spectral and time pattern of some of these 
independent components, e.g. 1,4,6,11,15,20,23 (and compare with other non-artifact ICs such as 5,7,9).  
Note thploat_ItC.m  yionu f huanvcet tioo nu se the locs file ‘Standard-10-20-Cap58_good.locs’ since 
the ICs have been estimated for the dataset of 58 good channels. 

7  )Remove the artifact ICs (1,4,6,11, from 14 to 25, 28 and 29) and reconstruct the good channels data 
cleaned from the artifact components. Plot the time pattern of the good channels before and after artifact 
removal. 

8)A d  d back the bad channel to the dataset of cleaned good channels. To this aim, add a row of all zeros at 
the original binadexd_ba dc) ohabntnaeiln pionsgi at sieotn o (fr 5o9w s =i 1g1n, aasl ss.t Noorteed  in 
that the values at the bad channel are irrelevant since in the following step the bad channel will be 
interpolated based o5n9 ×ly 9)7   oi50nn0  ta he values at good channels.  Save the so obtained dataset (
.matdat afExeircilse7_e2.m (ate);. tgh.i s will be imported in EEGLAB to interpolate the bad channel 
(see point 9).  

9  )Open EEGLAB and import the .mat created at point 8, together with the file of channel locations 
‘Standard-10-20-Cap59.locs’  (now you have 59 channels, where the 11 one is bad and has to be replaced 
via interpolation), a‘Tnodo lisn>sInetretr tphoel vaatleu e of the sampling rate. After importing, select 
ElecInt trhoed weisn’d. ow, under ‘What channel(s) to you want to interpolate’, use ‘Select from data 
channels’ and choose the channel (F1) to be interpolated. As ‘Interpolation method’, leave ‘Spherical’. 
Press Ok. Then, in the Command Window, run the instruction 
Xinterpolated=double(EEG.data); (EEG.data is the dataset in EEGLAB containing the 59 
channels widoutbleh c tohnev ienrtte frrpooml saitnegdl F1e c thaon dnoeulb;l e precision). Finally, 
from the CommanXindterp oWlaitedn idno wa  s.maavte  ftihlee v (aer.iga. ble 
dataExercise7_3.mat).  

10In)   you lro .amd s tchrei .pmdatataE,xterc fise7i_3.lmate), g ceonnetraaitneidn agt a ploli gnoto 9d ( 
channels + interpolated bad channel(s). Perform re-referencing to average reference, adding back the 
signal at the online reference electrode (CPz) in the last row.  Append the label ‘CPz’ to the cell array 
ch_names. 

11Th)  e final data obtai60n ×e 9,d7 a 5an0t0d p cooinntta 1i0 nairneg o rganized as 2-D matrix having size 
all cleaned good chans + interpolated bad chan(s) + recovered online reference CPz, all referred to average 
reference. Now con￿v =e  6nr0otw t)h  ael doantga t thoe a f 3i-Dr msatt rix having the channels (
dimension,￿_ t￿ =h￿e 5)0  sa0almopnlge tsh ew istehcionn eda dcihm eepnosciho (n, and the epochs 
along the third￿)   diism eeqnustsaim_itlypoe ts.n o To. t T hhee o lveenrgatlhl o nfu mber of epochs (
convert treshhaepe. d  ata from 2D to 3D, use 

Finallysub,-0 s35_aPrepvroceess eidStnep2 .tmath teh .em faotl fliolwei ng quantities 

X: 3-D matrix of the da￿×t￿_ ￿a ×￿￿ a)  fter all the previous preprocessing steps (size 

ch_names: cell arra￿=y 6e c0loencttariondiensg; t he labels of all 

srate: value of the sampling rate; 

stim_types: cell array indicating the type of each applied stimulus (labels: ‘standard’, ‘target’, 
‘distractor’). 

 

OPTIONAL: Apply all preprocessing steps (Exercise 1 + Exercise 7) to the EEG data of a different subject 

involvedsub -i003n_se st-01h_taesk- Rsesta_eemg.maet” ,e uxspienrgi tmheen sta “ me script files 

already used in Ex1 and Ex2 for sub-035 (note that by applying the correlation criterion, you will find no bad 

 2 


 


channel for sub-003, and points 8 and 9 in Ex7 will be skipped for this subject). Note that in this case, the 

independent components that are likely to mainly extract artifact activity are: 1, 2, 3, 11,from 14 to 17, 19, 20, 

22, 25, 27, 28, 30. 

 

Function  

[P,F]=pwelch(X,WINDOW,NOVERLAP,NFFT,Fs) 

retP tuhren pso iwne X,r e sspteicmXt iarntatelod d s beeync dstiiivtoiynd osif cn ogn taining a number of samples 

speWIcNDOiW.NO fVERiLAPe sdp ienc ifies the samples of overlap between adjacent sections (leaving it at the default 

value [ ],N FaFT  5i0s%  otvhee rnluampb eirs  ouNfsFFT  epidos)i g.n rtesa utseerd t thaon c alculate the spectrum; if 

WINDOW the data inF se iasc thh see scatmiFp rolenit inusgr z fnersre toqh-uepe avndecdcyet d(o=.r  s orfa te). 

frequencies at which the poF iw ￿se× ar  1  density is estimated (the resolution in Hz is equal to Fs/NFFT). Specifically, 
 

vector0 t o￿o/f￿2 w  firt￿e/￿h￿q ￿s (u￿tt￿e￿he=nup+cs     )i 1 es from 

   

IfX i s a vector, it is conX viesr a￿t× m￿e) a,d tt throei  apx o c(woelru mn vector and treated as a single channel. If 

spectral density is calcuP(lsaiP tz= eed o ifn dependently for each column and saved in the corresponding column of 

￿×￿) . 
 


SuggestioWINnDOW  foofr 5  sWcINDeoOW=c5m*Fosp),nu NdOtVERsiLAP  an(tg  tPSD:h( [u]e),sa dene df ault value

use zero-paddNFFiT=2n*WINgDOW )t.o Th ien fcrreeqa￿u/sNeFFeTn= fcrye rqeuseonlcuyt rieosno ilsu tthiuosn  (
 

 0..1   Hz


 


Function (not built-in function) 

plot_IC(index_ICs,A,Y,P_ICs,F,chan_locs,Fs,t1,t2) 

for each sindeex_lICs,e fcotr ein ddeex_ xIICC s(=a[i1 m2n p6]d) lgieecnaetreadt iens  a single figure 

containing the topograA pihsi tch mea eps otfi mtahet eIC,d t mhei xtiinmge  pattern and the power spectral density. 

matrix (= inv(W), wherY (￿e ×￿ )W i iss t thhee o dveemriaxliln sge mta otfr iexs toibmtaatiende d from EEGLAB), 

independent coP_ImCs (p￿×o￿) n iesn tthse ( sneott o ofn ployw tehre s opneecst troa ble d pelnostitteyd o),f  all ICs 
 

(returpwelnch te￿′o)dF, (  ￿b × y  i1 a)sp tphley viencgt pweolchr,ch  aon_lfocs  ifsr etqheu encies returned by 
 

name (betweFes ins q tuhoet ste1a a mmtna2 pddrle kinsno)gt o eff rt tehheqe ut .lieonmcces yr ,fa inlgee, ( in s) for 

plotting the IC time pattern.  

e.g.  

t1=0; % s 

t2=30; % s 

index_ICs=[1 2 6]; 

plot_IC(index_ICs,A,Y,P_ICs,F,’Standard-10-20-Caps19.locs’,srate,t1,t2) 

 


 


3 